## What is Crunch

Crunch is the compulsory overtime during a games development. This can occur at any point in a games development, but is most likely to occur closer to the games planned release date. It has been described as necessary to get games out on time by industry leaders. It has long been a part of the industry, but gained more widespread recognition in 2004 after the "EA Spouse" blog post. This, initially anonymous, post was made regarding how EA had pre-crunch which was 8 hour days 6 days a week to prevent BIG crunch. The big crunch came, and started at 12 hour days 6 days a week. This eventually became mandatory hours of 9 AM to 10 PM, occasionally getting out early on Saturdays at 6:30PM. Oftentimes, executives will use love of the art as a way to encourage devs to stay on. This is nothing more than an exploitation tactic. Even worse, if some devs leave while others stay, those that leave might get labled as not a team player or reviewed poorly post launch, putting their livelihoods at jeapordy. 

## How does it effect the Industry

As I mentioned, there are those in the industry who feel it is necessary for game development. However, the results show otherwise. Cyberpunk 2077 developer, CD Projekt Red, pledged to avoid crunch, but instead mandated six-day work weeks. They made the already delayed release date. However, when the game released it was plauged with glitches. After a too many hours staring at a screen, your eyes lose focus. Small issues that would otherwise be easy to spot get away from you. This is nothing to speak of the damage it does to an individual. Burnout, anxiety, and sleep deprevation are only a few. Devs who can't take it anymore are more likely to leave the company, and possibly the industry, resulting in a loss of talent. Who knows what games we could have gotten if a few devs hadn't been so beaten by crunch they had stayed. With the increased complexity of games in the current era, there is a higher likelihood of the quality to drop. This was the case in Cyberpunk 2077, among others. Mass Effect Andromeda similarly suffered under crunch, and that game still hasn't recovered from the reception at launch.

## How can we fix it

There are a few drivers that can result in helping to calm this issue. I am a big supported of Unionization across the development sphere. As it is now, the workers lack the ability or barganing power to push back against crunch. Unless the situation is so out of hand and extreme, as it was in the EA Spouse event, that a class action suit can be brought against an employer. Unionization could also help rebalance the scales of profit sharing to go more to those actually doing the work instead of an over-bloated executive class, but that is another issue. Speaking of that executive class, leadership that does a better job in factoring in issues and being realistic with their teams capacity would also be a step in the right direction. While I am not a big fan of a lot of Nintendo's recent actions, how they handle game announcements and releases is something that other major players could learn from. Excluding Pokemon, Nintendo tends to open with a game announcement that is open ended. As they work on the game, this window narrows. From a Coming to a Coming Soon. As more work gets done, and the quality benchmarks they set are met, that might turn into a year, then a month, then a day. Or, in the case of Metroid Prime 4, they announced the game in 2017, announced it needed more work in 2019, said it was coming soon in June of 2025, and finally gave it an official date in September. Other companies could do that just as easily. The now classic Apology jpeg announcing a delay on social media is also acceptable. Unless the do as CD Projekt Red did and push the apology jpeg out, promosing no crunch, but crunch anyways. Finally, public awareness can go a long way. Some gamers are becoming more aware of the issue and choosing to push back. It is a hard line to walk, however. I don't want to support crunch, but I want to support the developers. If I buy the game, execs think crunch is ok and if I boycott that company the devs might lose their jobs. I can't tell you what is right, but I can say that in any situation where a studio is being accused of forcing crunch, speak up for the devs and not the studio. In this group, you all are far more likely to be the ones getting crunched vs the ones enforcing it. 

### Sources
https://www.thegamer.com/ea-spouse-still-has-a-point/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erin_Hoffman
https://creativesunite.eu/article/crunch-in-the-gaming-industry-a-persistent-crisis-in-the-digital-playground
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crunch_(video_games)
https://www.polygon.com/metroid-prime-4-beyond-release-date-trailer-nintendo-direct/
https://umarhassan96.medium.com/explainer-what-is-crunch-culture-and-how-does-it-affect-video-game-studios-3f7d40d1b08f
https://igda.org/resourcelibrary/crunch-unsustainable-work-and-management-abuse-definitions-and-standards/
https://jacobin.com/2023/10/video-game-workers-crunch-exploitation-union-organizing
